
Portafolio
Description
The present portafolio contains three machine learning projects dealing with distinct types of data: computer vision and images, text and natural language processing and tabular. All projects involve classification tasks.

The first project uses simple algorithms for classification and plain vanilla neural networks; while the second and third projects only utilize deep learning methods, starting with Convolutional Neural Networks(CNNs) and ending with different types of Recucurrent Neural Networks (RNNs).

Similarly, the first two projects involved extracting the best performing models in each project and comparing them to several top performing models that were used by others to solve the same task. The third project, on the other hand, did not use this comparison. Thus, in the third project selecting a final model required more use of trial and error, relative to the first and second projects.

The model comparisons shown in the first two projects required using an username and password to access the ai competition. The username and password were excluded from the published notebooks.

Each of the mentioned projects is further explained below.

Project 1: Predicting World Happiness
This project aimed to classify happiness level per country using U.N data. Happiness level was: very high, high, average, low, or very low. It was predicted by using GDP per capita, social support, healthy life expectancy, freedom ro make life choices, generosity, perception of corruption and region for each country. This data shows that richer countries have the highest level of happiness on average. They, also, have on average the highest social support, healthy life expectancy, freedom to make life choices, generosity and perception of corruption. However, some outlier countries do not follow this pattern.

Before running three models to predict World Happiness, the country name variable in the dataset was replaced with a world region variable. This allowed for a regional understanding of world happiness levels, rather than a more granular evaluation of happiness levels per country. Also, the variable country would not have been an appropriate predictor of happiness level; as it is only relevant to one observation within the data.

K-Nearest Neighbors, Random Forest, and a Plain Vanilla Neural Network were used to predict happiness level. Note that other popular algorithms for classification, like Logistic Regression and Suppport Vector Machine were not select given that the target variable was not binary. However, Lasso was used for feature selection. The most accurate model was the Plain Vanilla Neural Network.

In this case, the top perfoming model would have been improved with the incorporation of more predictors (e.g.crime rate) given the small size of the data. Thus, including any other country level features is a step to further improve world happiness level predictions.

Project 2: Diagnosing brain tumor
This project aimed to build models to predict brain tumor using MRI images. So, it started by demonstrating when images have tumors and when they do not throught visualizations.

The importance of this project relies on its applications.Building predictives models with the mentioned data is usefull for health care providers and their patients; because these models enable quick tumor diagnosis which in turn leads patients to start treatment promptly and have a higher chance of being cured.

Convolutional Neural Networks with different layers and optimization techniques were used to complete this task. The most successful of these followed the VVG19 arquitecture. Also, it employed transfer learning. Meaning that a model trained on a different task was re-purposed to complete the brain tumor diagnose.

A comparison with models used by others to complete the same task revealed that the use of a 2-unit output layer, adam optimization, a 0.001 learning rate, images with 224 by 224 by 3 dimensions, and 64 number of filters yielded the most accurate diagnosis. Similarly, incorporating less layers (lower than 19) and trainable parameters improved accuracy. Thus, this task benefits from the use of more parsimonious models.

Project 3: Classifying news articles
This project aimed to classify BBC news articles in 5 categories: tech, business, sport, entertainment, and politics. The BBC dataset included 2,225 articles. Most of these articles were about sports followed by business, politecs, tech, and entertainment in that order.

To complete this task, the following models were used:

A model using an embedding layer with Conv1d layer.
A LSTM and GRU using an embedding layer with one sequential layer.
A LSTM and GRU using an embedding layer with staked sequential layers.
A LSTM and GRU using an embedding layer with bidirectional sequential layers.
Among these models, the GRU bidirectional model was the best performer. This model gets information from future states simultaneously. It emulates a person skimming passages to understand what they are about, without retaining most of the passages'content, by reading the text in the news articles as a cummulative to grasp the main topic. Therefore, classifying news successfully does not require the memory unit of the LSTM model. So, the performance of GRUs and LSTMs is contextual.

In this case, the top performing model would have been improved with the use of glove embeddings and a combination of the GRU layers with the Conv1d. Thus, including any of these is a step to further impove news articles classification.

Further reading
For a more comprehensive understanding of these projects, please refer to linked files in each project description.
